          /======================================================\
          ||  Game mechanics and rules                          ||
          ||  Source MUD MUD Server Software                        ||
          ||  Copyright (C) 2006  Sean Middleditch ||
          ||  Sean Middleditch <elanthis@sourcemud.org>            ||
          \======================================================/

 I    Introduction
 II   Core Concepts
 III  Primary Aspects
 IV   Skill and Lores
 V    Special Abilities
 VI   Advancement Paths
 VII  Life and Death
 VIII Experience

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
 I     Introduction                                                        I
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is the game mechanic ruleset used by Source MUD.

One important aspect to keep in mind is that the ruleset internally uses
numbers of a larger scale than what the players will see.  In general, all
numbers are scaled down by a factor of 100 when displayed to the player, with
all fractions rounded down.  So, a Strength aspect of 2474 would be displayed
merely as 24.  This presents a bit of uncertainty to the players.  While they
know the general range of most of the numbers in the system, they can't tell
what their exact values are.  Two characters with St(24) may not be exactly
the same strength.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
 II    Core Concepts                                                      II
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Characters are composed of a set of primary characters (II), skills and lores
(III), and special abilities (IV).  These attributes define the physical
capabilities and attained knowledge of the character.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
 III   Primary Aspects                                           III
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Primary aspects are broken into two groups: earthly (physical) and celestial
(mental/spiritual).

Human characters are expected to have aspect values in the range of 1000 to
5000, with 1000 representing the ability of young child and 5000 representing
the most extraordinary individuals, such as world champion athletes or
reknowned scientists.

Earthly aspects may be improved with practice, but celestial aspects may not.

Earthly aspects:
 Agility (Ag)      Deftness and fine motor control.
 Endurance (En)    Stamina and ability to persevere.
 Quickness (Qu)    Speed and physical reaction times.
 Strength (St)     Brawn and muscle.
 Toughness (To)    Fortitude and resistance to harm.

Celestial aspects:
 Bearing (Be)      Charisma and aura.
 Discipline (Di)   Will power and self control.
 Intelligence (In) Logic and comprehension.
 Perception (Pe)   Attention to detail and intuition.
 Wits (Wi)         Quick thinking and mental reaction.

Earthly aspects can be increased at a cost of the current value divided by
100.

New characters begin play with a primary aspect value in the range of 2000 to
3000.  Players may either choose to have their primary aspects determined by
their starting career or they may select their aspect values from one of the
following lists.  When using the list method, two lists must be chosen, one
for earthly aspects and one for celestial aspects.  The same list may be
chosen for both sides.
 3000, 2800, 2500, 2000, 2000
 2700, 2700, 2500, 2200, 2200

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
 IV    Skills and Lores                                                   IV
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are three varieties of skills: advanced, basic, and lores.  The
difference between the three types of skills comes not in how they are used,
but when they may be used and how they are improved.

Advanced skills may not be used at all unless they the character has at least
some training the skill.  Any attempt to perform an action based on an
advanced skill by an untrained character automatically fails.  Basic and lore
skills may be used by anyone without restriction.

All three skills may be improved by spending experience points.  The cost for
raising a skill is based on the skill variety, with advanced skills being the
most expensive and lore skills being the least expensive.  Additionally,
neither advanced skills nor basic skills may be improved without a teacher if
the character is completely untrained in the use of the skill.  Once a
character has any amount of training in the skill he no longer requires a
teacher to improve the skill.

Lore skills may be improved in a second fashion.  Every uncommon creature and
item in the world has an associate lore and associated lore scarcity.  If a
character encounters such an uncommon entity, and if the entity's lore
scarcity is ranked higher than the character's associate lore skill, the
character's lore skill improve by a small margin.

All skills are valued in the range of 0 to 10000.  A value of 0-500 means
that the character is untrained and not capable of using the skill
effectively.  Notably, this means that the character cannot use or improve
advanced skills that fall in this range.  The specific rankings are:
 0-500     Untrained
 501-3000  Apprentice
 3001-6000 Skilled
 6001-8000 Journeyman
 8001-9500 Master 
 9501-9999 Legendary

Skills also offer synergy bonuses.  A synergy bonus is when one skill
provides an increase to another skill.  This increase is considered part of
the skill for all intents and purposes except for the calculation of synergy;
namely, if an advanced skill is pushed to 501 or higher by way of synergy
bonuses, the character may freely use and improve that skill.

Synergy bonuses are calculated by taking the square root of the skill's value
and then multiplying by the skill type scale factor; for advanced skills,
this factor is 3, for basic skills, the factor is 1.75, and for lore skills
the factor is 0.9.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
 V     Special Abilities                                                   V
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Special abilities function in a manner similar to advanced skills, except
that a special ability is a boolean value; a character either has the ability
or he does not.  Like an advanced skill, a special ability may not be used
unless the character is trained in the ability.

Many special abilities use particular skills.  In this case, the special
ability may not be learned unless the character is at least at apprentice
level in all skill dependees.

If a character is of journeymen level or better in all skill dependees, he
may learn the ability without the aid of a teacher.  Otherwise, a teacher
must be found in order for the character to gain the ability.

Many abilities are not dependent on any skills and neither have skill level
restrictions nor are able to learned without a teacher.  Some skills have
other special requirements, such as possessing certain traits, having
experienced certain encounters, or even having other special abilities.  All
such prerequisites must be learned before the character can obtain the
ability.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
 VI    Advancement Paths                                                  VI
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Paths are a template by which a character gains skills, abilities, aspect
improvements, and other advancements.  Paths are simply a list of
advancements with priorities.  As a character becomes elligable for new
advancements they are automatically purchased for the character.

All characters begin with a path.  This path is one of the starting paths.
Starting paths are short and do not contain many advancements.  A character
may not change his starting path until it is complete; that is, until every
advancement on the path is purchased.

Once a character has completed his starting path, he may select any other
path, or he may choose to have no path.  In addition to a path, a player may
select a reserve amount, which is an amount of experience which the engine
will not spend on path advancements, allowing the player to spend experience
on non-path advancements as he sees fit.  Choosing to have no path is the
equivalent of requesting a 100% reserve amount.

Characters still in their starting career may not have a reserve amount set.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
 VII   Life and Death                                                    VII
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Characters have a number of life credits.  When a character dies, his spirit
remains bound to his body for a short period of time.  If an appropriate
healing method capable of restoring life is applied to the body within this
time, the character is resurrected and incurs no life credit penalty.
However, if this time runs out, the spirit leaves the body, and at this
point, a life credit must be expended in order to be resurrected.

A character has the option, once his time has run out, to either continue
waiting for someone to supply resurrection or to be respawned at the nearest
friendly temple.

Characters who have not yet completed their starting path never lose a life
credit, even if their time period runs out after death.  

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
 VIII  Experience                                                       VIII
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Characters earn experience for over-coming hard-ships.  Experience is broken
into several different types, and characters have separate pools for each
type of experience.

The five types of experience are:
 Warrior
 Caster
 Rogue
 Spirit
 Quest

Experience costs are separated by experience type.  
